Introduction by sadhguru: https://youtube.com/shorts/FgBjInkwopA?feature=share

NOTE: Nithyananda says: "The message of the Shiva Sutras is: You are Divinity!"

Seiva sobre liberation/liberdade/mukti/aghora: Quando alguém te contradizer quando afirmas que poucas pessoas sao independentes incluindonessas peara quem falas. Prova-lhes que não sao independentes e que não atinjiram mukti... puxa do vomito e vê se elas vão atras de ti... se forem atras de ti, não estao em mukti

Seiva Descriptions {

   SS #11: In my imature experience, stopping the doors of the senses means: not to be rigid while perceiving the ant in the arm, instead, feel the ant as if it is in the center of your experience, in the center of your universe, because if that happens, you feel the energy (bhairav) but not the location of the creeping

   SS #14: Technique to use when yoy are in yhe bed trying to sleep but you are restless constantly moving without stopping, always unconfortable in each pisition... if yhat is the case you are at rest in some part of the body and without rest at some other part of the body... in yhat case, lock yourself lock your muscles in such a way that you rest in a tense form, you may be ywisted in the body, yor back may even be arched back or twisted some way, but you can find that assymetric looking pisition like a sheet of metal that gets crooked by either too hot water or too cold water.... the sheet of metal bends, this bending is the middle tentions betwwen the two temperatures... so when you are in the bed, decide to rest and in that rest you will find the urge to move to the second full rested position, start the movement to the second position but stop in the middle, stop in the middle of the two restfull pisitions and the only way to do that is by finding a certain disconfort... you know that you have found this sutra when the unconfortable position which is in the middle of the 2 restfull positions expend for each and every muscle of the body... if your whole body muscles contrubute to this positions, you will find yourself locked in the middle of the bhairava (the energy), in the middle of the two rest positions. At this point, dharana is the method described to find this midlle position. To find and ininterruptedly experience this full body tension in between two restfull positions, and the the energy you are putting out will be consumed until samadhi.... until ko energy is no more there, and you will find not  2 restfull positions + 1 restless positions, but 3 restfull positions.... samadhi
   SS #15 {

      Explanation from Nithyananda why some enlightned masters sever limbs of their disciples to get them enlightened:
         (he gives the meaning of tapas): - Tapas: Ready to work on the technique at any cost, any risk
                                          - Therefore this techmique is only for those whom enlightenment becomes FIRST priority

      A very good explanation of Maya is found in the video where Nithyananda explains this sutra
         (video: "Just Fall In - Shiva Sutras in Nithyananda Videos"; URL: https://youtu.be/Gkp2p7JVLB)
   }

   SS #25: Seiva created a script to ring a bell randomly at any time within 24 hours, and the person who is aware of the script/program, will stop as soon as the bell is rang. So, after this, there is a question... what to do if you stop and then you have the inpulse again of continuing your life and do something? Well, we must undertand that this sutra is a technique and is meant for you to be aware if the stopping, it is not for you to become lazy... therefore you definitly will continue with your life at some point. If life is really flowing and if at some point you feel yhat your life is goung to continue, than keep up the game of the shiva sutras (as per SS #110: "Gracious one, play...") and the script will suggest the sutra #108 to you the player where, before you continue to run your life, first you see where the flow of life is trying to pull you thowards

   SS #27: Maybe this is the origin of the Dance "Shiva Tandava"

   SS #28: My girlfriend is incapable of saying portuguese curse worfs like "cagalhão, fuck, hore, shit" etc... And I keep her in this zone where I spell each silable of each word and slowly, very slowly she joins each silable and pieces the deprivation I put her into. She says the first silable of a curse word and I wait for it to create a certain feelinh in her mind... then I do the next for the next silable... The moment each silable of the word gains a new meaning, now, we join the together

   SS #29: Do you feel stuck somewhere or wuth something? devote yourself to the process, are you in jain? devote yourself to the process, devotions frees. Sadhguru sais in Inner Engeneer ans in Shambavi: "All the rules are my rules". Devotion may make you feel smaller, seeing everything bugger that you, in case your handcuffs start increasing in size where you are smaller and smaller, suddenly they may loose grip or your hands ang you may escape. God is definitly bigger, right?

   SS #35: In one sentence what I would say is: "Notice depth... either if it is a well of if it is masters's eyes"

   SS #35: Jusy as Lao Tzu taught his disciple: stay on this bridge and do not go out until river stops and bridgr moves.. At that moment you know the yin yang... but further continuing, go on changing your prespective from yin to yang, from yang to yin, from yin to yang until you see the snake wich is sushumna... the edge of the bridge will not be a straight line if you keep changing you eyes from yin to yang, yang to yin... your eyes will like you are drunk. Bridge moving + river sptoped = Ida. Bridge flowing + River moving = Pingala. The edge that separates both can be a fixed surface or a wave form, that is sushumna

   SS #44: The origin of the zen koan: Find out the sound of one hand clapping

   SS #75: The best compliment you can give to a person is the imitate. This sutra aparently talks about Autenticity, the ability of being our best version... If somebody misbehaves about one of your attitudes that was not pleasent for them and block you from there life, do not immitate this gesture by blocking back, instead, be a permanent light to the world... allow the other perso to go throw yhe rubber band effect and come back or, if the person does not come back, you can still decide to shine some light on their life... This behavious will give you tremendous joy... you will live by joy and autenticity instead of imitation. If somebody slaps you, add the same behaviour to your life only if you find that such attitude would be a joyfull attitude to apply to every body. If you find such attitude pleasent, give a slap back, otherwise, be a light and an example. People who are unaware of joy tend to be imitate. I suggest you imitation only that wich is the best

   SS #83: It isn't your body that speaks first, it is your mind. Notice that

   SS #101: Seiva translates this sutra as: "Believe omniscient, omnipotent, permeating, perculating everywhere.." And when we deal with dumb people from the village, we feel the lack of knowing from them, like if inteligence is not yet reaching it's depts.... Another way of seeing this dumb people with stone like brains is to see that their rock like brain is a building block for a bigger scale of "small" particles that we, the observer, cannot yet step in because we are too thin for this rock like scale 

   SS #104: Whatever you are experiencing right now visually and with every other sense, take a snapshot of it and keep it until you absorb everything

   SS #106: Sadhguru explains this sutra in inner engeneering as: "I am responsible for everything". Seiva Says: this is the sutra for marriage without burocracy wich is the true marriage

   SS #108: The TAO, Wu-Wei is the allowance of the individual for the body to freely float along the river... if you leave your body to float with the river, you experience one level of Wu-wei, the TAO... the same way... if you perceive your body's tendencies and routines as if you are simply watching a log of a tree floating along the path of least resistence, now, you see the spirit of guidance... Osho describes in his experience of enlightenment "I felt the power of God, I was not there, God was there... and I went at 1 am in yhr night to a garden where I used to go and I climbed the gate as a thief, I had to do it, I was nit there, God was there". (Osho Words are not those exactly, please watch: https://youtu.be/oqXYUiWVlkU)

   SS #109: Salvia divinorum gives you this one

   SS #112: This sutra describes what Nithyananda calls "Kailash"

   Names of shiva: "Asudosha: Easily pleased (meaning that you don't need much to please him)"

}

Nithyananda YouTube Videos {
   SS #72: Link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gWQyJHiT9js
   
   Seiva Sais: I don't know if this sutra is sutable for what sadhguru says os not. BUT... If the sutra mentions the living presence of the cosmos, then I think this sutra is sutable for the question to sadhguru about what to do with mountain sized karmas. He's answer about huge amounts of karma was: " -Even if you himalayan size karma, inverse the equation and use this complexity.... instead of passion thowards you and dispassion toward other, no..... total passion about everything else (every other life), total dispassion about this one (refering to ourself)" - Video: With sadhguru in challenging times - day22 Apr"" 

}

Shiva Sutra #7 {
   > With intangible breath in center of forehead, as this reaches the heart at the moment of sleep, have direction over dreams and over death itself.

   video by Nithyananda: "Shiva Sutras Death Demystified" (https://youtu.be/beqUPL4Y2tg)

   - This sutra explains perfectly what by mistake, Seiva experienced at the hospital during army burnout. He tried this sutra during the night and he experienced the death state, he experienced 2 realities at the same time

   Nithyananda: "prana means air energy"
   
   Seiva: something to try: did you ever see a kid trying to sleep sitting down with its head straight? and starting to hit the wall with the head over and over and over? Well: at the moment where you feel so sleepy that your neck starts to wave like a snake, do the sutra. At that moment, head is free falling... stopping... free falling... stopping... yin... yang... yin... yang... ... KEEP YOUR REMAINING wakefull attention in such free fall
 }

shiva Sutra #16 {
   Nithyananda explains Pratyahara Shambavi Mudra and Sadhana in this video
   evaluate: "$ ss links" to see the link 16 of this video
}

shiva Sutra #17 {

   Nithyananda YouTube video {
      Nithyananda, while explaining SS #17, explains "this moment is inevitable" as taught by Sadhguru in inner engeneering and shambavi
      "The moment you acept you, there won't be any thought"
      Youtube Video: "Catch the thread of existence - Shiva Sutras" (https://youtu.be/c06CTQJfC74)
   }
}

Shiva Sutra #20 {
   Seiva says: Fill the whole car like a statue, still, if you keep you center of mass in line between a strong base and a light head, experience. When you cook bread and you swirl the bread around the container with a certain amount of flour, the uncooked bread can experience the same as you. For the second part of the sutra, you can watch toy story movie at the part where Jessie introduces woody. The woodie's walk with style is an example: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wbkojrVKj-s
   seiva says: "in a stil vehicle, in slowing invisible circles" I think it means that the vehicle must have springs yo bounce a little bit
   
   Seiva says: Vivekananda got enlightened by his guru with this technique: the guru asked if the had the courage to sit. vivekanada sat and the guru put one feet one his chest. by rithmically swaying him, the experience. video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pviWGX7bLF4
}
Shiva Sutra #25 {
   Nithyananda sais at the video "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eq0V-seTR2I": "Patanjali says: Just sit straight and you will enter into meditation"

   Sadhguru tells the story how Ashtavakra Enlightened the king Janaka: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=24HmHvT6M04" (when comming down the horse, stoped at one leg up, one leg down)
   
   # uDev: Create a script at home stereo system: Randomly whistle a sound. The moment you listen to the sound, you must STOP completly without adjusting! (Just like Nithyananda told in his video). Sugestion for sound: rattle snake sound
   
}

Shiva Sutra #28 {

   Nithyananda YouTube video: He says that the sutra itself how it is presented in this list, is a commantary of an enlightened master Abhinavagupta at the 9th century and the sanskrit translation of the sutra is: "Having meditated on the gross and weak shakti in "vada sha endrias" (12 endrias) thus making it subtle, one who enters the heart space and meditates there attains mukti, becomes liberated and takes a quantum jump into ultimate consciousness"
   video from nithyananda: https://youtu.be/ouo1k3mtJRA
}  

Shiva Sutra #83 {
   Nithyananda YouTube video {
      Nithyananda explains something that mooji also explains: Keep every tought aside and see what remains
   }
}

ss 49 {
   - One example of shaken senses is: tapping and untapping your ears like morse code as many people do as a kid
}

SS 91 {
   Nithyananda talks about mariage and divorce in this video acording to india
}
Osho Audios {
   Link: https://oshoworld.com/vigyan-bhairav-tantra-vol-1-01-40/
}

-- Nithyananda says that you cannot separate the master from his experience. If you try to have the experience of the master and reject part of his way of life, the you are in trouble... a master is anybody who can reproduce his experience, so if you follow a master and you want to experience his experience, then you should not reject any aspect of his being... Shiva cannot be separated from shiva sutras, he was teaching them while he was at that moment experiencing them. (That also defines a master, because false masters tell you to practice or do things that they themselves do not do. So, if such practice was so important how is that, that such so called "masters" did not yet strive to embibe and live that way? At this point you distinguish from opinion to mastery). If you do not reject any aspect of shiva's way of life, you may experience the full shiva sutras (so what are his qualities?? how did he dress for each ocasion? try that)... So if you try to behave like shiva in order to experience his experience of life, then there are something else I would like to notice. Sadhguru said that Shiva did not spill is seed, his sperm, because it is used to reach the peak of consciousness... The fundamental vital energy in the system, instead of spilling it, letting it go in a physical manner which would lead to reproduction, he used the same energy to reach the peak of consciousness. He spilled from the top of his head. When a human being is not involved in the reproductive process, naturally his attachment to the body is very minimal. Once his attachment to the body is very minimal, the sense of fear does not exist. When there is no fear, he is naturaly a valiant. That is the consequence of this. (Youtube video where sadhguru tells this: https://youtu.be/G6anZKkPOYM) - Seiva D'Arve
-- Sadhguru sais that these shiva sutras were transpired between 2 people with utmost intimacy, not in terms of sexuality, it means that there was no resustance between the two. Devi was open to whay is being offered. Video: https://youtube.com/shorts/FgBjInkwopA?feature=share

NOTE: Big list of nithyananda videos about shiva sutras: https://nithyananda.tv/playlist/shiva-sutras/
